[CIS-1002] Message List Documentation (#1437)
GetStream/stream-chat-swift: docusaurus/docs/iOS/components/message-list.md

---
title: Message List
---

import ComponentsNote from '../common-content/components-note.md'
import MessageListProperties from '../common-content/reference-docs/stream-chat-ui/chat-message-list/chat-message-list-vc-properties.md'

> The `ChatMessageListVC` is a component that renders a list of messages. It is responsible for deciding on how it should render a message dependent on its content and type of message. The messages data should be provided through the data source named `ChatMessageListVCDataSource` and some important actions should be delegated through the `ChatMessageListVCDelegate`, very similar to how a native `UITableView` and a `UICollectionView` works.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `ChatMessageListVC` is a component that renders a list of messages. It decides how to render a message based on its type and content. The messages data should be provided through the data source named `ChatMessageListVCDataSource` and some important actions should be delegated through the `ChatMessageListVCDelegate`, very similar to how native `UITableView` and `UICollectionView` components work.
```

:::note
The Stream SDK already provides a [`ChatChannelVC`](../channel) and a [`ChatThreadVC`](../thread) that use the `ChatMessageListVC` to render the messages from a Channel and Thread, respectively.
:::

## Usage

> In case you want to compose a custom Chat view and not use our built-in `ChatChannelVC` and `ChatThreadVC` components, you can use `ChatMessageListVC` to display the list of messages. The messages should come from a `ChannelController` or a `MessageController` depending if you want to display messages from a channel or a thread.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If built-in `ChatChannelVC` and `ChatThreadVC` components does not suite your need, consider using `ChatMessageListVC` directly. The messages should come from a `ChannelController` or a `MessageController` depending if you want to display messages from a channel or a thread.
```

        channelController.messages.count
    }

    open func chatMessageListVC(_ vc: ChatMessageListVC, messageAt indexPath: IndexPath) -> ChatMessage? {
        return channelController.messages[indexPath.item]
    }

    open func chatMessageListVC(
        _ vc: ChatMessageListVC,
        messageLayoutOptionsAt indexPath: IndexPath
    ) -> ChatMessageLayoutOptions {
        guard let channel = channelController.channel else { return [] }
        return components.messageLayoutOptionsResolver.optionsForMessage(
            at: indexPath,
            in: channel,
            with: AnyRandomAccessCollection(channelController.messages),
            appearance: appearance
        )
    }
}
```
As you can see, we implement the data source to feed the message list with the messages from the `ChannelController`. The most complex part is to calculate the layout options for each message, but since our custom `ChannelViewController` implements the `ThemeProvider` protocol, we have access to the `components` and `appearance` config, and with these we can use the `MessageLayoutOptionsResolver` to calculate the layout options for us.

> The `ChatMessageListVC` provides events throught the `ChatMessageListVCDelegate` so that we can react to actions and important lifecycle events.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `ChatMessageListVC` provides events through the `ChatMessageListVCDelegate` so that we can react to actions and important lifecycle events.
```

            dismiss(animated: true) { [weak self] in
                self?.messageComposerVC.content.quoteMessage(message)
            }
        case is ThreadReplyActionItem:
            dismiss(animated: true) { [weak self] in
                self?.messageListVC.showThread(messageId: message.id)
            }
        default:
            return
        }
    }

    open func chatMessageListVC(_ vc: ChatMessageListVC, scrollViewDidScroll scrollView: UIScrollView) {
        // handle scroll events, and check if the last message was read, to mark the channel read.
        if messageListVC.listView.isLastCellFullyVisible, channelController.channel?.isUnread == true {
            channelController.markRead()
        }
    }

}
```
Currently, by implementing the `ChatMessageListVCDelegate` we are able to handle when a user performs an action on a message, when a message will be displayed, and when the user is scrolling the message list. More events might be added in the future, but for now these should be enough to implement the most common features in a chat view, like pagination, marking the channel as read when the user scrolls to the bottom, and handling message actions.

> Finally, we need to implement the `ChannelControllerDelegate` to handle the events from the `ChannelController`. This will make sure that the messages are always in sync with the server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, we need to implement the `ChannelControllerDelegate` to handle the events from the `ChannelController`. This will make sure the message are always in sync with the server.
```

You can also set your custom `ChatMessageContentView` in the `ChatMessageListVC.cellContentClassForMessage()` function, this is especially useful if you have multiple instances of `ChatMessageListVC` and each have different `ChatMessageContentView`'s.

```swift
final class CustomMessageListVC: ChatMessageListVC {

    override func cellContentClassForMessage(at indexPath: IndexPath) -> ChatMessageContentView.Type {
        CustomChatMessageContentView.self
    }

}
```
As you can see above, by overriding the `cellContentClassForMessage(at:)` function we can change the `ChatMessageContentView` that is used to render the message.

### Message List Layout
Like any other component in the SDK, you can customize the message list layout by overriding the `setUpLayout()` lifecycle method when subclassing `ChatMessageListVC`.

```swift
final class CustomMessageListVC: ChatMessageListVC {
    override func setUpLayout() {
        super.setUpLayout()

        NSLayoutConstraint.activate([
            scrollToLatestMessageButton.centerXAnchor.constraint(equalTo: view.layoutMarginsGuide.centerXAnchor)
        ])

        dateOverlayView.removeFromSuperview()
    }
}
```

> In the simple example above, we moved the `scrollToLatestMessageButton` to the center bottom of message list, instead of the bottom right corner, and also removed the `dateOverlayView` from the view hierarchy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the simple example above, the `scrollToLatestMessageButton` is moved to the center bottom of message list, instead of the bottom right corner, and also the `dateOverlayView` is removed from the view hierarchy.
```

---
title: Message List
---

import ComponentsNote from '../common-content/components-note.md'
import MessageListProperties from '../common-content/reference-docs/stream-chat-ui/chat-message-list/chat-message-list-vc-properties.md'

> The `ChatMessageListVC` is a component responsible to display a list of messages. It is not the responsibility of the message list to know the source of the messages, the data should be provided through the `ChatMessageListVCDataSource` and the `ChatMessageListVCDelegate`, very similar to how a native `UITableView` and a `UICollectionView` works.

Reviewer 2: I suggest making this a positive sentence, say what it is and not what is it not :)

First, we need to setup our view controller and set the layout constraints of the message list. For simplicity, we will be using the `ComposerVC` included in the Stream SDK, but you could provide your own message composer as well.
```swift
open class ChannelViewController: UIViewController, ThemeProvider {
    /// Controller for observing data changes within the channel.
    open var channelController: ChatChannelController!

    /// User search controller for suggestion users when typing in the composer.
    open lazy var userSuggestionSearchController: ChatUserSearchController =
        channelController.client.userSearchController()

    /// The message list component responsible to render the messages.
    open lazy var messageListVC: ChatMessageListVC = ChatMessageListVC()

    /// Controller that handles the composer view.
    open lazy var messageComposerVC = ComposerVC()

    /// Flag to control if it is currently loading previous messages.

>     @Atomic private var loadingPreviousMessages: Bool = false

Reviewer 2: can we move the `loadingPreviousMessages` inside the framework? We should not leave this to the customer

Author: Yes I was discussing with @kojiba to move this to the LLC

Author: In the documentation I can remove this for now, and just call:
```
channelController.loadPreviousMessages()
```

            messageComposerVC.view.bottomAnchor.constraint(equalTo: view.bottomAnchor)
        ])

        // Setup
        messageListVC.delegate = self
        messageListVC.dataSource = self
        messageListVC.client = channelController.client

        messageComposerVC.channelController = channelController
        messageComposerVC.userSearchController = userSuggestionSearchController

        channelController.setDelegate(self)
        channelController.synchronize( { [weak self] _ in
            self?.messageComposerVC.updateContent()
        })
    }
}
```

:::tip 
In order to be easier to setup child view controllers you can add this extension to your application:

```swift
extension UIViewController {
    func addChildViewController(_ child: UIViewController, targetView superview: UIView) {
        child.willMove(toParent: self)
        addChild(child)
        superview.addSubview(child.view)
        child.didMove(toParent: self)
    }
}
```
:::

Next, we need to implement the `ChatMessageListVCDataSource` to connect the messages from the `ChannelController` to the `ChatMessageListVC`.
```swift

> extension ChannelViewController: ChatMessageListVCDataSource {

Reviewer 2: we should not ask the customer to add this boilerplate code, ideally you get this out of the box (ie. call 1 method, inheritance, ...)

Author: What do you mean by calling one method? 🤔 The only way I'm seeing to make this easier is to have a `ChatMessageListChannelDataSource` and a `ChatMessageListChannelDelegate` already implemented. The problem is that, if we do this, it makes sense for our `ChatChannelVC` to use them as well, which means, `ChatChannelVC` won't be any more a `ChatMessageListChannelDataSource` and `ChatMessageListChannelDelegate`, so this will cause a breaking change.

The same applies to the Thread.

        return channelController.messages[indexPath.item]
    }

    open func chatMessageListVC(
        _ vc: ChatMessageListVC,
        messageLayoutOptionsAt indexPath: IndexPath
    ) -> ChatMessageLayoutOptions {
        guard let channel = channelController.channel else { return [] }
        return components.messageLayoutOptionsResolver.optionsForMessage(
            at: indexPath,
            in: channel,
            with: AnyRandomAccessCollection(channelController.messages),
            appearance: appearance
        )
    }
}
```
As you can see, we implement the data source to feed the message list with the messages from the `ChannelController`. The most complex part is to calculate the layout options for each message, but since our custom `ChannelViewController` implements the `ThemeProvider` protocol, we have access to the `components` and `appearance` config, and with these we can use the `MessageLayoutOptionsResolver` to calculate the layout options for us.

The `ChatMessageListVC` provides events throught the `ChatMessageListVCDelegate` so that we can react to actions and important lifecycle events.
```swift

> extension ChannelViewController: ChatMessageListVCDelegate {

Reviewer 2: same feedback, this should be done by framework

    open func channelController(
        _ channelController: ChatChannelController,
        didChangeTypingUsers typingUsers: Set<ChatUser>
    ) {
        guard channelController.areTypingEventsEnabled else { return }

        let currentUserId = channelController.client.currentUserId

        let typingUsersWithoutCurrentUser = typingUsers
            .sorted { $0.id < $1.id }
            .filter { $0.id != currentUserId }

        if typingUsersWithoutCurrentUser.isEmpty {
            messageListVC.hideTypingIndicator()
        } else {
            messageListVC.showTypingIndicator(typingUsers: typingUsersWithoutCurrentUser)
        }
    }
}
```

## UI Customization

You can customize the message list by subclassing the `ChatMessageListVC` and replacing the `Components.default.messageListVC` component.

<ComponentsNote />

### Message content view
In order to change how the messages are rendered, you need to subclass the `ChatMessageContentView` and replace it in the `Components.default.messageContentView`. For more details on how you can customize the message content view, you can take a look at the [Customizing Messages](message.md#customizing-messages) documentation.

> You can also set your custom `ChatMessageContentView` in the `ChatMessageListVC.cellContentClassForMessage()` function, this is especially useful if you have multiple instances of `ChatMessageListVC` and each have different `ChatMessageContentView`'s.

Reviewer 2: awesome
